Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer, Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee, Sophia Kahn.
Location of interview, Swicker Office.
Today's date is the 12th of October, 2015.
Sophia, before we start, would you be kind enough
for the record to spell your name in full?
Yes, Steve.
Sophia S-O-P-H-I-A, Kahn, K-H-A-N.
That's fantastic.
So, when did you first, and how did you first
make contact with the Cardiff Carnival?
It was through my steel pan teacher at the time, Wadda.
I was 14 and I'd been playing steel pans for him.
Actually, he'd been teaching me in school,
and then he got me and my friend involved
in Cardiff Carnival.
That's fantastic.
Were you at Fitzhallen High School
or were you?
No, I was in Lamb Remney High.
Got it.
In Lamb Remney.
And of course, for those who don't know
and for future posterity, Wadda, his official name,
Hubert Placide, is from the wonderful Caribbean island
of St. Lucia, and I had the pleasure of meeting him
for the first time in 1991 when Swicker was based
in Channelview Leicester Centre down in Grangetown
when I had a knock on the office door
and Mike Johnson, who ran the centre, said,
I've just had somebody pop in from the Caribbean
who's wondering if there's any bar work,
but he plays steel pans.
And that was, he introduced me to Wadda,
and way back then we brought the first set of steel pans
and put him on wage, and that's when he began
teaching steel pan, primarily in schools, back in 1991.
And here we are in 2002, and he's introduced you
to Cardiff Carnival, you're playing pan regularly.
Can you remember a little bit about your record
as a panist, a pan man, woman in pan?
We couldn't decide pan player, we couldn't decide
what to call you in our preamble.
Yes, take a-
Pan person.
Pan person, I like it.
Well, yeah, so the area of Cardiff, which I'm from,
we didn't know about Cardiff Carnival at all,
and it was a new thing to us.
So yeah, Wadda told my friends and I about it.
And yeah, he brought us down on the,
I think it was a launch party,
so we could have a look around.
And this would be to the Butown Youth Pavilion?
Butown Youth Pavilion, yeah.
Excellent, down the docks.
And yeah, from there, my friend Nina Kiaga,
who's been involved for a long time,
we both got involved at the age of 14.
And yeah, Wadda was a great mentor, he was a great teacher.
And he, oh, from that day, from that time,
we had gone on then to do street parades in Carmarthen,
and then we started doing Swansea Carnival as well.
Excellent.
So he kind of linked us in from there
to do other youth projects.
And I'm right in thinking, Cardiff Carnival 2002,
the steel pan was performed not on the back of a lorry,
not walking with your pan set inside a float,
but it was actually a Caribbean format
called Pan Round the Neck.
And I remember the carnival team,
and certainly Wadda giving us instructions
as to how to make the backpacks
to hang the steel pans off
so that they're in front of you and you're there playing.
You mentioned that Wadda gave you some very good advice
in the event that you were to drop your pan sticks
whilst on parade.
What was his advice to you?
So yeah, he said, if we drop our sticks,
there's no way we can pick them up again.
And it was nice because you'd always have someone
running behind you, giving you water.
They would pick your sticks up.
But we had, well, other weeks leading up to carnival,
we could decorate our backpacks.
So we'd use straps of material
to wind around the shoulders and the harness.
And we'd kind of make pockets to put extra sticks in.
So we could just grip them out.
Kind of like a drummer when they've got spare sticks
in their back, like a little backpack.
I was thinking of more of an archer actually
reaching for his bow and arrows behind him
when he did that.
It was like, next one, you know.
Bish bash bosh.
And I mean, you know, Wadda taught in a way
that everyone can play, even when people would say,
oh, you know, I'm not musically minded at all
and I have no rhythm.
Wadda's got a gift that anyone, anyone of any background,
any walk of life, the kids, he, like, you could play pans.
He'd teach you in such a way that would liberate you
and make you feel that, you know, basically,
like when you're there on the pan, you were invincible.
But in a good way.
In a good way.
And I mean, you know, especially for, you know,
at the time I just lost my father and for a girl of 14,
that was the best therapy anyone could ever give to me.
And, you know, and I always take my hat off to Wadda
and he'll always hold a dear place in my heart
because, yeah, he opened up a door to me
that I never knew existed.
And did you start off on bass pans,
which of course are six full oil drums on the floor?
Yeah.
One person playing six drums has always,
I've always thought that person is just like,
yeah, the way they swivel around.
Yeah, when I started playing, it was eight drums.
Wow.
With you in the centre.
Yeah, sometimes it's eight, sometimes it's six.
Right.
So yeah, I started playing bass, bass drum.
That's where I was.
And then I moved on to,
but when I played in Carnival, I started on guitar.
Right.
So when you're walking with a pan, they get condensed down.
So guitars usually two pans,
but when you're walking, it turns into one.
A pan round the neck, it's gotta be one.
Yeah.
And then as time went on,
I moved on to tenor,
which is kind of like the vocals of the band.
Yeah.
Which was amazing.
It's perfect.
It is.
It was nice to be able to play,
you know, a few different parts in the pan orchestra.
Yes.
So yeah.
Fantastic.
When Wada was leading the pan round the neck group on Parade,
would he be playing pan or would he be on a cowbell
with a whistle at the front, giving you the basic rhythm?
Well, he's facing you, isn't he?
He's facing, like Samba Galeas,
their musical director faces the players,
as his back to the audience.
So at times he'd either be on a snare.
Right.
So he'd be playing snare.
Yeah.
Or he'd be on a whistle with a cowbell.
But Wada would be getting involved.
He'd always have a set of sticks on him.
So he'd just like jump in and you'd be playing pan.
On your pan?
Brilliant.
He'd play like, you know, an extra few notes.
And it was nice because he would get involved.
It wasn't just like, okay, I'm the, you know,
I'm beating this.
Yeah.
He'd really get involved.
And he'd always pick the parts.
Like the icing on the cake.
Yeah.
Even when the years, it would rain so much.
Yes, yes.
It would be really hard to play your pan.
You'd have to keep tipping it out.
Let's talk about, yeah, so you literally had to,
I can remember when, you know,
when we knew that the forecast was bad,
that amongst our shopping lists for the day would be
huge amounts of, the most absorbent kitchen roll
we could think of.
Because for a nanosecond, we could wipe the pans
and you'd be back to where you started.
But I mean, so you came on, what can be called
a few of the deluge years.
Yeah, I think the worst year was when
we first got put on a float.
Right.
Did it have a roof on it or not?
No, it didn't have it.
We learned to put roofs on them eventually.
Yeah.
And it was the year that we were down the oval basin.
Right.
And they had all the decking.
So the bag got really, really slippery.
All the Samba girls had to take their heels off
because they couldn't dance on it at all.
Yeah.
And yeah, it was literally,
it was really hard to play any songs.
Why do I care if our spirits are up?
Our face painted, washed away.
We kind of looked like drowned rats.
But happy carnival drowned rats.
Yeah, it was happy.
And I just remember every two minutes
having to empty my pan of water and gather up the rest.
This is steel panning Wales, folks.
You know, the truth behind the...
But it was fun.
It was fun.
I can remember the audience's reaction
because we don't hear as much steel panning Wales
as perhaps we ought to do, you know,
so that when there is a chance to hear it in a public...
For me, I can always tell where the pan band was
because there's something about that music
that seems to touch everybody.
You know, that really, you could tell.
There'll be smiles and cheers
and you just know where the pan band was passing
at that point.
I never saw people turn...
Yeah, it seems to me that steel pan has a universality
and an uplifting...
There's something about it that brings out the best
in the audience as well.
Steel pan has got the ability.
I mean, every instrument has got the ability.
When it's played and played right,
you know, it can touch everyone.
You know, it does.
It touches your soul.
But steel pan has got the ability
for someone who thinks they can't play an instrument
to be able to play it and feel like a virtuoso.
And I think...
So it's really accessible, basically.
Yeah, and it's got such a life to it.
And it's, you know, at the end of the day, it's an oil drum.
A guitar is made in a way it is crafted.
And even though a pan is made,
it's...
Yeah, it's kind of...
It has.
It's made the same way as guitars,
it's got all the love and, you know,
all the devotion in it.
But it's a drum at the end of the day.
It's an oil drum.
It was used and then it's been recycled into something
that makes the most beautiful sound
that you'd never think would come out of an oil drum.
And yeah, as soon as you play
and you see the reaction of the people,
yeah, it just makes you want to play more.
And it takes you to a place.
And especially as a child, you know,
it takes you to a place which you don't even know exists
and it lets your imagination free.
So your carnival history began as a pan player, a panist.
Other members of your family were also involved
in Cardiff Carnival in different respects.
As musicians, as dance tutors,
and I suppose everyone gets involved in the making.
So after several years with Wadda and the Steel Pan Group,
playing pan around the neck,
we get to as late as Cardiff Carnival, 2011, Magic.
And there was a very, very popular, in fact, yes,
I think it started off relatively small,
the American Indian section.
And you ended up making your first ever
queen costume on a backpack.
What was that like?
Well, I didn't wear the backpack, but-
You designed it, you made it?
I had-
You plucked those chickens?
Yeah, well-
Little balled chickens in China is all I can say.
Yeah, Adrian gave me an unlimited supply of feathers.
And wire.
Right.
And yeah, I made my first headdress, big headdress.
Yes.
Was there any glue gunning involved?
Because I always associate the smell of burning human flesh
with the carnival camp.
Yeah, it was a lot of burning flesh.
It was a lot of glue gunning.
Excellent.
Pastor Bernie's, that's a-
Yeah, and it was, yeah, it was brilliant.
It was the first year that I got involved dancing.
And I would have done pans if Wazza had been involved.
And it was quite, yeah, it was quite hard for me
because I wasn't gonna get involved in the first place.
Because, yeah, my heart lied with the pans.
Right.
And yeah, so it was only because of my sister
that I got back and, well, I came back to carnival.
Got it.
And yeah, I had a really good time.
It was, yeah, it was really good being able to dance
and not play pans.
And the carnival camp would have been
at Channel View Leisure Center then.
Yeah.
Yeah, well, I remember on the one hand,
we were lucky to secure a big space
because we need lots of room.
But did the lack of natural daylight in there
ever do your head in?
It was a bit like going into sodium-lit hell
after a while, wasn't it?
Yeah, it was quite hard.
But at the same time, I was used to working backstage
in theater so you don't have-
You don't need natural daylight or fresh air
or any of those vitamins or whatever.
They're for whips.
Yeah, but it was quite a change.
I think in the pavilion, there was more of an atmosphere.
Like that.
It had been more than five.
And certainly we had to park outside
when the weather was good.
We could take work outside.
Which was really nice.
So Channel View was quite restricted in a way.
And I think a lot of the public felt that as well.
So I think maybe that's why you didn't get
as many participators as you normally would.
Like that.
Just because Carnival is built on vibe,
it's built on feeling, it's built on emotions.
And workshop is exactly the same.
So if there's something lacking in that,
then people go off feelings, they go off their vibe.
And yeah, I think that's why maybe-
No, no, I can see, respect that.
Yeah, maybe it hadn't hit the numbers
that everyone thought it was.
But it was great.
I had a good time and enjoyed everything.
So if you decided to make the giant backpack
with unlimited feathers, I love that idea.
That's a good name.
That's a good name for a carnival company, isn't it?
Unlimited feathers.
We might use that in the future.
Were you in the American Indian section
when you were dancing on the parade or not?
Because you said you didn't play it.
Yes.
So you were around it and the rest of it.
Yeah.
And would your sister, Sakina Khan,
would she have dared to give you dance steps
or were you autonomous as a group?
Oh, no, no, no.
Yeah, she gave us a really good choreography
and I'm not a dancer at all.
I don't claim to be a dancer.
But yeah, it went well with the music.
And yeah, I think there was 40-
It grew and grew and grew.
Yeah, it grew.
It was a very popular section.
So I think at times, she made it well.
So the more it grew, the dance wasn't too complicated.
It would still look good though.
Excellent.
She still pulled it off.
And yeah, I had fun doing it.
It was good.
It was a good experience.
Lovely.
And the following year, of course,
your brother was involved.
Take us through that year.
How did you get involved in the Blue Warriors, wasn't it?
I remember.
I had a break from the tour I was on.
So I came back to the UK
and I just popped down to say hello to everyone.
And it was the only time I was gonna get to see-
It's like being press gang, this bit, isn't it?
Yeah, before-
It's like, well, you learned from that lesson, didn't you?
Yeah, and then I saw Asia in
and then Kath, the seamstress at the time.
And they were like, oh, you should stay and help out.
And I was like, oh, okay.
So I was like, well, I've got a few weeks off from work.
And then Misha and Naomi were there
and I hadn't seen them in a long time.
And I just ended up getting involved
and I wasn't gonna do it.
And I was like, oh, I wanted to break.
It's like my time off from work.
But yeah, I did.
I had lots of fun with that.
And it was a nice difference.
It was a nice contrast from the previous year
with my sister.
Yeah, so we were blue warriors there
and it was comfortable.
The costumes were so comfortable.
Yes, well, they were daisy cutters, big baggy trousers.
Yeah, I could see the royal blue, royal blue color.
Really beautiful, yeah.
And the royal blue and silver,
they really stood out.
They were really, really vibrant.
The head pieces again were more,
I would just say that the masculine version.
So you really could throw yourself around
if you weren't worried about something.
Yeah, no, and it was nice.
And Imran designed them in a way.
So even though he didn't use feathers,
the material he used, when it rained,
it didn't damage the headdress at all.
No.
And it was really light on your head, really, really secure.
To be honest, it was the first time in Carnival
that I'd worn a headdress, even when I was playing pans
and we'd have to wear head pieces.
You didn't feel like you were wearing anything.
So you could throw your head about,
you could do big jumps in the air, big kicks,
and it stayed on your head.
And it rained really bad that year.
It did, yeah.
It rained really bad.
And it's perfect because it was like plastic.
So it didn't even get wet.
Your head didn't even get wet.
So it's like wearing an umbrella.
The perfect carnival headpiece in many ways.
Before we go on to your most, so we've had Pam Blair,
we've had Designing and Making, we've had Dancing.
You really are a true carnivalist, I would say.
And then before we get into, or perhaps your final role,
which was this summer in 2015, well, let's go there
and explain a little bit about what you've been doing
in the rest of your career, et cetera,
because there's a point of contact, isn't there?
There's obviously, carnival is about pressure.
It's about making whatever the resources,
we try to make them go twice as far.
We work in a mythical seventh gear.
The whole project starts with a deadline,
before the clock's ticking from day one.
And at the heart of that, we have the designer,
but their right-hand person is the seamstress,
the person who is overlooking the physical creation,
the interpretation of all these designs, who's there.
And you were the seamstress for Carder Carnival 2015.
How emotionally ascarred are you, Sophia, by that?
That was a joke.
Very emotionally ascarred.
No, no, it's fine.
She seems to be well.
Yeah, well, my job as a seamstress anyway,
and working in theater, and you know,
you've got deadlines on you constantly.
So that was, so yeah, you live on a deadline.
So yeah, I was, to be honest, I was quite fine with that.
You look very much in your element.
Yeah.
And you had the right accessible, but authority as well,
which is, I'm dealing with this person,
so wait patiently, and you will have my attention.
Yeah.
And it seemed like a formula that everybody,
by and large, understood, you know.
I think that could show that it came from your background.
I mean, I'm thinking you've worked,
oh, that's a name drop.
You worked on cruise ships,
but you also have worked as part of DreamWorks.
Was that a year-long tour of Madagascar?
I was impressed.
It was, yeah, so it was a year with DreamWorks.
Well, actually, I worked with DreamWorks longer than a year
because I did Ice Age on Ice with them.
Wow.
Which was a cast of 44 people, 44 performers,
and the same amount. Touring UK or internationally?
We did some parts in the UK,
and that was the whole setup and rehearsal dates.
And then we went on to do a Germany tour,
and then once the Germany tour was finished,
I went on to set up Madagascar,
and then I toured with Madagascar.
We did a UK tour, which was amazing,
and then we went on to do a Latin American tour,
which lasted almost a year in Latin America.
Wow, hell of a life experience.
So, yeah, it was a long time on the road.
You know where the bodies are buried, don't you?
You should see the smile on her face at this point.
It's all coming back.
So you took all that experience,
and you brought that to Cardiff Carnival in 2015.
Well, tell us more.
I mean, yeah, I mean, it was a...
Before that, I'd been working.
I'd been doing a lot more with artists and dancers,
so I'd been working with various singers, pop stars.
Care to drop a few names?
Probably shouldn't, but yeah,
I was doing local crew wardrobe for a long time.
Local crew meaning I traveled up and down the country
with it as well.
Local to the UK.
Yeah, I did, well, I started off,
I think the first big person that I'd worked for
was Lady Gaga.
And I know I shouldn't be, I didn't...
My jaw just dropped.
Well, I'm not, I wasn't really a fan of her music at all.
I'm still not really.
Not even Wadis' version of Poker Face on steel pan.
Wadis' version, Poker Face was one
of my favorite songs to play.
Excellent.
It was one of my favorite songs to play.
I always thought that was,
when he played me that the first time,
I was just like, wow.
Yeah, but Wadis could play,
literally he could make any tune.
I mean, even like country and western songs,
he'd like,
I've heard.
Convert those into a pan
and he'd make them sound better than the original.
Yeah, and like I've done like people like from like
smaller like UK acts like Westlife and Alton John,
see how George Michael.
Yeah.
Peter Andre was probably the last person I'd worked with
before I went on and did.
Got it.
I made a career movie tomorrow.
Yeah, yeah.
Music theater.
And I went into theater.
Got it, got it.
But yeah, I mean, I've been,
yeah, I've been doing wardrobe
and seamstress work for quite a while.
Got it, got it.
Yeah.
In terms of challenges this summer
at the 26th Cardiff Carnival,
was there anything when you were up against it,
was it time or whatever,
or was it all smooth?
There was anything good, bad or ugly,
what sort of comes to mind?
It's sort of like,
I do occasionally have to say,
look, that's not going to work.
Yeah.
You know, because you're very much part
of the design process.
And I think the thing is,
you know, we all have these images in our mind
that we want,
that you know, we want this to happen
and we want this to happen.
And when you've just got one person making,
making,
because really I'm there to make all the base costumes
then they get embellished.
But at times there's more work that I have to do
that the public can't do.
So I have to do part of the embellishment.
Yeah.
But yeah, I mean, there was at times,
there was challenges.
I think there were challenges for everyone really.
It's a very pressurized situation.
It's an art form that sort of invites that.
Yeah.
We're going to try really hard now to do something.
But I think, I think because of like,
because of my background and having to work quite,
quite quickly,
it was just kind of like a normal pace for me.
Yeah.
And to be honest, some, some days I was like, oh,
I think I'm working quite slow today.
But I just-
Not that we would have noticed.
I mean, you just seem to, you know.
But I just think-
You seem to be so in your element.
Every time I pass you, you just like-
Yeah, I'm quite, I'm like, you know,
when I've got my project at hand-
Sophia, sorted, Sophia, sorted.
Just walk past her.
I like her.
She's clearly, yeah, this is a woman who's not,
who's, you know, she's not waving and drowning.
Yeah.
She's waving, you know.
I think, you know, the day, like the day,
the day I went in and Adrian and Jallian were like, right,
so there's machines, there's the material,
and this is your area.
So just set it up how you, like, how you want it.
So I did.
Yeah.
And I didn't know whether it was set up the right way
or how the seamstress did it the year before.
There was no, there was no pass-over or handbook.
No, no, you're free to do what's-
Which, which, you know, at first I was just like,
oh, okay, so that's why I kept asking questions.
Like, okay, how, like, how do you guys do it?
Because, you know, when I go into a job,
there's like kind of, there's kind of like nonwritten rules
or kind of like a pass, like a pass-over book.
Like, this is how, you know, guidelines.
And then you just basically do what you want to do.
But this was basically a free-for-all.
So you just go in and just do what you do.
Which in the end worked, worked well.
And I think if I was to do it again,
then, you know, I definitely,
I know where to start from.
And I know for a fact, if I was to do it again,
then I could probably make a lot more costumes
in the time that I had.
And, and I know, you know,
I know how to organise my time a bit better.
And I think as a, you know, it is a community project.
And, and yeah, it was, it was, it was fun being,
it was nice being able to have the freedom
to get in and design, you know.
And, and, and as well, like work, work with the,
with the community.
Yeah, yeah.
It was, yeah, it was quite a fulfilling job.
It's quite, it's quite a fulfilling role.
And then, and then at times being able to just sit down
and have my cup of tea.
So Sophia, I mean, it seems to me that you
and other members of your family,
have had an extraordinary history
in terms of Cardiff Carnival.
What's nice is the way that you've come in
from so many different angles
and contributed so much over such a long period of time,
since you were 14.
So starting as a steel pan player
and the very wonderful Wadda,
moving on to design a huge backpack
and help with other costume construction.
And then dancing alongside both your brother
and your sister as tutors.
And then your final incarnation as El Supremo,
the seamstress who is the source.
You remember slightly at the,
you're the hub at the center of a wheel, aren't they?
I mean, all roads led to you.
And the seamstress is, what can I say, corner,
which expanded to quite rightly
to take over the space it needed.
So I have no reservation whatsoever
in wholeheartedly awarding you the mythical
and entirely visible honor of Sophia Carn,
you are indeed a Cardiff Carnival hero.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.